---
title: "<em>Wanderers, Kings, Merchants: The Story of India through its Languages</em>"
categories: [indian linguistics, book]
# description: "Notes on and thoughts about the book by Peggy Mohan."
author: Aryaman Arora
draft: yes
---

The first time I heard about this book was from Monojit Choudhury, in the context of us discussing the various words for lotuses (*Nelumbo*) and water lilies (*Nymphaea*) and how language contact and evolution had affected those individual words over time and space in South Asia.[^1] (Just to give some context.)

Since then, there have been at least two Twitter threads on this that I've seen: [one by Lavanya Murali](https://twitter.com/anthrocharya/status/1397155457530220551?s=20) on an interview of Peggy Mohan by *The Hindu* (raising important points about her framing during that), and [this one by Ayush](https://twitter.com/LotusTile/status/1411938297262215180?s=20) that got pretty heated (on Dravidian/IVC substrata leading to the loss of aspiration in Punjabi, which I will get into in a bit). So, I read the book. These are my thoughts on it, trying my best to be fair but also looking at what the literature says about the points raised by Dr. Mohan. Her perspective as a creolist is a cool way of looking at historical linguistics in South Asia, but there are many issues in her book that haven't been adequately responded to by examining the actual published linguistic literatures and the broader consensus of Indo-Aryan historical linguistics.

So, I'll try to go through some of the contentious points and issues in the book in a fair manner; I hope it's useful and interesting to people who have gotten interested in Indian linguistics because of this book. And the aim is certainly not to discourage any interest of that kind, nor to malign the author (who rightly has one more doctorate than I do).

## 1: The Creole Model

I begin with the first chapter, as any normal reader does. This was a very exciting intro to the book. Dr. Mohan raises very important points about the excessive focus on literary languages and a top-down view of history when looking at the evolution of Indo-Aryan as it came into contact with the languages of South Asia.

> Many linguists and historians in India believe that the substratum is a layer that can ‘leak up’ and infiltrate a language like Sanskrit, which had no signs of Dravidian influence up to that time. What they imagine is that the people who had brought Sanskrit to the subcontinent had themselves changed.

There are very clear reasons for us to think that creolisation occurred in Indo-Aryan languages in contact with some substrates. The Dardic group[^2] had highly conservative linguistic features (Kalasha-mon even preserves the Sanskrit verbal system to an extent, and all of them mostly retain the original Sanskrit clusters) while the mainland Indo-Aryan languages, spoken in less secluded territories, have dramatically restructured their grammars. But on what this substrate is, I am compelled to depart from Dr. Mohan's claims. We'll look a bit more into depth on what issues arise in each chapter.

## 2: Retroflexion
So to begin with, let's summarise the process of migration that Dr. Mohan describes in this chapter and what scholarly work corroborates it. Yes, listing isn't as interesting as the narrative she lays out, but it's useful to see where we stand.

1. **There was a migration of Indo-Aryan speakers into India at some point**. The conception of these movements has shifted from a weird Orientalist idea of "pure" nobles who rode in on war chariots (the defunct *Aryan Invasion Theory*) to instead a more gradual migration with frequent conflict, both internal and external, as there is in any movement of peoples. Now, there are huge misconceptions associated with this and it's a very sensitive topic. But looking at recent work in genetics (Narasimhan et al. 2019), we can pretty confidently say that modern Indians have a genetic mix of Indus Valley Civilisation (IVC) peoples and a lesser portion from steppe migrants (the Yamnaya, i.e. Indo-Europeans) among North Indians. Similar Yamnaya ancestry is found throughout Eurasia--I won't go into it much since genetics is not my focus here but yeah not a proponent of the Out-of-India things.
2. **The migration was male-dominated.** Narasimhan et al. (2019) agrees on this as have previous genetic studies on Y-DNA. I don't know genetics though so I leave it to readers to assess the validity of the scholarly consensus.
3. **Indo-Aryans immediately intermarried with Dravidian speakers.** There is nowhere near a consensus on this. This presupposes that (1) northwest India had Dravidian speakers living there in the 2nd millenium BCE, who have now all vanished with little trace on the languages of the Himalayas, and (2) the IVC had originally Dravidian speakers. *The first seems to have no strong evidence associated with it.* Genetic studies like Pathak et al. (2019) find no Dravidian influence, and in fact more Central and West Asian genetic influence, in northwest South Asians. Dravidian substratum in the lexicon and grammar is highest in Marathi, Gujarati, Odia, and languages immediately adjacent to modern Dravidian, and no one has reliably shown Dravidian influence on the most northern IA languages in Kashmir and the Hindu Kush. Nor are there Dravidian languages continuing to be spoken anywhere near there save for Brahui in Balochistan, which may be from a more recent northwards migration. *As for the second issue*, the IVC may well have spoken a Dravidian language---the other option is "para-Munda", which people studying Munda like [John Peterson](https://www.isfas.uni-kiel.de/de/linguistik/mitarbeitende/john-peterson) have pretty much discarded---but we cannot say so with certainty since the script is undeciphered, and the Vedic migration was centuries after IVC collapse so the linguistic landscape had plenty of time to restructure.
4. **Diglossia developed in the descendants of migrants.** Reasonable claim, although I don't think the substrate languages initially were Dravidian but diglossia surely developed given the prestige and liturgical status of Vedic Sanskrit vs. the ground realities of language change proceeding in informal contexts. The actual situation was probably extremely complex; there are some conservatisms in Middle Indo-Aryan that must have been due to dialectal variation in Sanskrit, and we can be pretty certain that even Vedic Sanskrit was not a monolith.[^3] Alongside that, it's interesting that the first writing in India is in Prakrit---Sri Lankan inscriptions and the Aśokan edicts---not in Sanskrit (the Vedas are older but entirely passed down orally). So if by the 1st millenium BCE we have Prakrits fully-formed and written down, they probably didn't appear overnight. Hock (1991) discusses some of these ideas a bit. And note the diglossia in modern languages of the region, where we have very Sanskritised registers for technical vocabulary and lots of interchange between (neo-)Sanskrit and Indian languages.
5. **Retroflexion developed over time due to Dravidian influence, and was only codified once the Vedas were written down.** So, again, it doesn't seem like there was a ton of Dravidian influence on the earliest stages of Sanskrit---we only see vast influence in the modern IA languages down south, and some in the Prakrits. It is hard to deny that retroflexion is indeed a pan-South Asian phenomenon (except as you go East). But the extremely isolated, in the genetic and geographical sense, language Burushaski in the northwest also has native retroflexion. Some scholars, like Bertil Tikkanen, entertained the idea of a vast Burushaski speaking region being the first group encountered by migrating IA speakers. That's speculative too, but we should keep in mind that it's not just Dravidian in South Asia being the source of retroflexes. Another thing to note is that retroflexion is not unique to the Indo-Aryan branch; for example, [Swedish is in the process of developing retroflexion](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Swedish_phonology#Sonorants) from clusters with *r*, leading to native [ʈ, ɖ, ɳ, ɭ, ʂ] and the dropping of *r*, without a substrate language causing it! We see this exact process in Sanskrit---we can trace retroflexion in Indo-European vocabulary to the RUKI-rule and Fortunatov's Law, which are phonological processes acting on native vocabulary rather than a change of random dentals to retroflexes.[^samo] To quote Dr. Mohan, "The substratum does not 'leak up' to infiltrate a privileged group that is proud of its language, and not overly eager to reach out to locals it regards as inferior."

So to recap, some aspects of Dr. Mohan's thesis---a migration, dominated by males, leading to intermarriage with locals and subsequent diglossia---constitute **likely or even broad consensus**. But then there are claims that the first contact was between IA and Dravidian speakers, that Dravidian entirely occupied the north and IVC but somehow was pushed all the way south of the Narmada with little trace, and that retroflexes had to be from substrate influence. I think these are, at the very least, **speculative** and unsupported by any scholarly consensus, and at worst, just made up with no attempt to examine the evidence.

There are a lot of factual errors in the discussion here too. A pretty bad one is in the discussion of voiced aspirates in Northwest IA incl. Punjabi, Sindhi, etc., which are replaced by a tonal contrast. She claims that Sindhi has /ɖ ᶑ/ (voiced unaspirated and voiced implosive) where Hindi has /ɖʱ ɖ/. But Sindhi actually has a complete series of /ɖ ɖʱ ᶑ/ with an aspirate, so the evidence is described incorrectly and that defeats her point. And then there is this passage:
> Voiced aspirates require the vocal cords to shift from being close together in vibration mode, for g, j, ḍ, d and b, to a sudden position far apart, so that there is an open airstream for a voiceless h. This entails a split-second lapse of tension in the vocal cords, which is difficult for anyone not used to such acrobatics to manage. Dravidian languages simply ignore them.

But of course, Northwest IA didn't just ignore it! It replaced it with a tonal contrast (and Dravidian doesn't have tone so can't just ascribe it to substrate again), and we know this happened recently because of evidence of *both* tone and voiced aspirates in Western Pahari languages undergoing an intermediate stage in voiced aspiration loss, as well as the fact that Punjabi speakers easily apply the tone rules to borrowed words with voiced aspirates from Hindi (Bhatia, 1975). It's too late for a Dravidian substrate to apply there, and it doesn't make sense that it would apply only there (and even on the Iranic languages Pashto and Balochi?) but not on closer languages like Gujarati and Marathi.

## References
* Arsenault, Paul. 2017. [Retroflexion in South Asia: Typological, Genetic, and Areal Patterns](https://www.proquest.com/scholarly-journals/retroflexion-south-asia-typological-genetic-areal/docview/1876538885/se-2?accountid=11091). *Journal of South Asian Languages and Linguistics* 4(1):1-53.
* Bhatia, Tej K. 1975. [The evolution of tones in Punjabi](https://www.ideals.illinois.edu/handle/2142/26491). *Studies in the Linguistic Sciences* 5(2):12--24.
* Hock, Hans Henrich. 1991. [Dialects, diglossia, and diachronic phonology in early Indo-Aryan](https://books.google.ch/books?id=8fVBAAAAQBAJ&lpg=PA119&ots=1RiwMlzoK9&dq=sanskrit%20diglossia%20vedic&lr&pg=PA119#v=onepage&q&f=false). *Studies in the historical phonology of Asian languages*, 119--59.
* Narasimhan, Vagheesh M., et al. 2019. [The formation of human populations in South and Central Asia](https://science.sciencemag.org/content/365/6457/eaat7487). *Science* 365(6457).
* Pathak, Ajai K., et al. 2018. [The Genetic Ancestry of Modern Indus Valley Populations from Northwest India](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0002929718303987). *AJHG* 103(6):918--929.

### Footnotes
[^1]: I say *South Asia* as a geographical region, roughly from Kandahar to Malé, and Balochistan to Rakhine. Some prefer *Indian subcontinent* or just *India*; for me, I am not interested in the political squabble so I pick a purely geographical and English-specific term. But I do like the sound of *Jambudvīpa*.
[^2]: I desist from calling it a family (or anything entailing a genetic grouping) because they don't really share innovations, just the fact of being extremely conservative. Maybe Samopriya will write something about that someday.
[^3]: E.g. *idha* 'here' instead of Sanskrit *ihá*, retention of some clusters like *jhar-* 'to flow' vs. Sanskrit *kṣar-*, variation in the derivational suffix *-māna* ~ *-mīna*, new verbs reflecting classes that hadn't been used for certain roots in Sanskrit, and so on; see Oberlies's work for more.
[^samo]: Exact quote from Dr. Mohan: "If Ur-Rig Vedic Sanskrit, like modern Indian baby talk [???], had only dental *t* and *d* sounds, the Vedic children could have made some of them retroflex..." Samopriya is writing up an overview of these processes and arguing that retroflexion needs to be studied from a broad typological perspective to be made sense of rather than carelessly assigned to substrate influence---I highly suggest reading that once he makes it public.