---
layout: post
description: Chapter 1 of The Languages and Linguistics of South Asia.
categories: [reading, language contact, historical linguistics, wave model]
title: Week 0
---

* **Reading**: Hans Henrick Hock, Elena Bashir (eds.) *The Languages and Linguistics of South Asia: A Contemporary Guide*.
* [File](https://drive.google.com/file/d/19maVuVP7XyIj21PALtmKi1ctEycO5cW2/view?usp=sharing) 

The discussion was broad and quite varied, given the nature of the reading. Future readings will probably not be the same; on the organisational side, for that reason, readings well happen *every 2 weeks* so that the intervening meetings are more open.

Some of the interesting discussion was on **language contact** and how that contributes to the difficulty of the tree model in describing South Asian language history. Areal features that have spread through contact that we discussed included retroflexion (note that even Great Andamanese[^1] and Burushaski have this, and Avestan's /ʂ/). Also of interest were *v > b*[^2] in Brahui, Kannada, and many Indo-Aryan languages, and *s > h* in Iranian and Northwest IA, which seems to be more of a chance convergence. The fact that unrelated families seem to be affected by feature spread is a big challenge for historical linguistics, in making sense of shared innovations.

There does not seem to be much work on applying the **wave model** in South Asia at least, beyond some recent statistical attempts. In Indo-Aryan, this work is done by Chundra Cathcart and Taraka Rama. Nothing similar in Dravidian despite the existence of good resources like DEDR. Some interesting work has come out on admixture models etc. in recent years, such as Murawaki (2020) on Fijian.[^murawaki] Note that the tree model has greater success in some regions than in others, and has been good for broad Indo-European reconstruction.[^4] Also interesting is regional reconstruction, which has been done by Toulmin for the north Bengal Indo-Aryan lects.

There was a short discussion in the comments about computational decipherment of "lost" languages which is really fascinating.[^5] Daggumati and Revesz (2019)[^daggumati] had a paper attempted to group undeciphered scripts visually. [A recent MIT article](https://news.mit.edu/2020/translating-lost-languages-using-machine-learning-1021) also was brought up.

We also discussed the principles behind **sound change**: can they be modelled statistically? Some sound changes are more likely cross-lingually (thinking of big databases that try to document these changes), such as palatalisation, but that does not seem to be a firm basis to rule out rarer changes.[^2] What principles are behind sound change? We discussed phonetic dispersion, the possibility of diglossia's influence, and mutual reinforcement of seemingly unstable features like breathy-voice in South Asia. We also listened to Sunil Menon's demonstration of Malayalam's three-way stop /t̪ t ʈ/ contrast, and two-way rhotic /ɾ r/, both rare distinctions in South Asia.

# Footnotes

[^1]: Gopalakrishnan R
[^2]: Suresh Kolichala
[^murawaki]: Murawaki, Yugo. "[Latent Geographical Factors for Analyzing the Evolution of Dialects in Contact](https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/2020.emnlp-main.69.pdf)." *Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP)*. 2020.
[^4]: Vineeth Rajan
[^5]: Jajwalya Karajgikar and Mukund
[^daggumati]: Daggumati, Shruti, and Peter Z. Revesz. "[Data mining ancient scripts to investigate their relationships and origins](http://cse.unl.edu/~revesz/papers/IDEAS19-a26.pdf)." *Proceedings of the 23rd International Database Applications & Engineering Symposium*. 2019.