---
description: Emeneau (1991) and Elfenbein (1987)
categories: [reading, Dravidian, historical]
title: "Week 2: Intro to Brahui"
author: Collective
---

* **Readings**: Emeneau (1991) on some etymological issues with Brahui pronouns and Elfenbein (1987) on the history of Brahui migration.


## The first-person oblique in *k-*
Brahui has first person oblique in *k-* which is very unusual in the broader Dravidian family, and is the focus of the first reading. The Dravidial 1sg.pron has been reconstructed as *\*yān*, and there's no regular sound change that explains *k-* in Brahui (usually < *\*c*). Several theories have been put forth about this (many involving a suffix such as oblique -ku being prefixed unusually) that Emeneau summarises. There are some other instances of *k-* appearing without etymological basis too (Ramaswamy).

Interestingly, Elamite has *-k* (suffixed) in the first person plural. We went off into a side discussion on Elamo-Dravidian pronouns here, and Gopalakrishnan noted this about the 2pl.pron: 
> "Original 2Sing nin- and 2Pl nim-. nim- > num-, and nin- is analogized to nun-. Then nun- > un- in analogy with 1Sing en- (oblique of nAn-)."

From Emeneau's paper, it seemed that we agreed that the appelative (cf. Classical Tamil) or dative (the well-known *-k(k)u*) source seems compelling; the latter even has a parallel in Kurux. Metathesis is the likely development if that proposal is true: *enku* > *ikan* > *kan* or something like that. Emeneau's proposal of rebracketing with the plural needs a big corpus to really show possibility of, especially since it relies on a specific word order to work.

## Brahui migration
About how the Brahui speakers got there: the usual consensus has been North Dravidian speakers migrated to around the Narmada and Islamic invasions scattered them, with Kurux-Malto going to Bihar/Jharkhand (the Chota Nagpur plateau) and Brahui going to Sindh and beyond. The alternative proposal is that Brahui is a conservative remnant of the initial Dravidian migration into India, and does not form a subfamily with Kurux-Malto. Kobayashi's work seems to be pointing towards Kurux-Malto being separate from Brahui (and indeed that is becoming the scholarly consensus), so we need a rework of the first proposal.

The unique convergence/multilingualism situation between Brahui, Balochi, and (to some lesser extent) Jadgali was also discussed. I want to point out that Kholosi has a large Balochi stratum but no apparent Brahui one, but this is probably not useful evidence given (1) we don't know about the Brahui-Jadgali situation sociolinguistically; they may not be in much direct contact like Jadgali-Balochi or Brahui-Balochi, and (2) Brahui has so little Dravidian vocabulary left that it's less likely to be borrowed into another language. Also interesting: Brahui dialects spoken in Kerman province [are being documented](https://www.academia.edu/45352555/Two_Brahui_Texts_with_Glossary_and_Grammatical_Analysis) (and they show the usual neat stuff, including *k-* in the 1sg.pron.obl).
